When AI steals your work, the legal power to force its deletion is called algorithmic
discouragement.
But while AI moves at lightning speed, the law lags far behind.
Take a Canadian illustrator who found dozens of AI images copying his exact artwork without
his consent.
It begins with web-screeping, automated tools extract massive volumes of internet images
to build a prepared data set.
This data set teaches a system's statistical patterns so it can produce derivative works,
building what's known as a generative model, entirely without the original creator's
awareness.
Canada's proposed AI and data act aims to regulate this pipeline, but it defers specific
rules to future regulations and open-ended approach critics call a blank check.
Because the technology operates now while rules are delayed, the law lacks proactive teeth.
It has no mechanism to investigate companies currently suspected of intellectual property
theft.
Crucially, it omits the power to mandate the destruction of models built on stolen data.
That specific deletion power is algorithmic discouragement.
Without it, the legislation can't undo the economic harm, already permanently embedded
in these systems.
And what about that Canadian illustrator stolen artwork from the beginning?
While the law can order data set destruction, his exact style remains trapped inside the
machine.